readme.md, before:

# Simple SQL Model

> A simple model wrapper around the `sql` library with helpful query functions.

This provides a bunch of convenience methods to create simple DB models quickly in a Rails-style query layout.


## Caveats

- This is considered somewhat in flux, don't use in production unless you're sure.
- This is stupid simple, it's just a dumb wrapper around the awesome `sql` module; you should check the source in `model.js` and the tests in `model.test.js` to see what's going on. I swear, it's *really simple*.
- This depends on new ES6 features like `async`/`await`, `Class` so use Node 7.8+ or above or transpile using Babel or similar.
- This isn't feature complete but it offers hooks to extend so you're not stuck with it's functionality. Pull requests welcome though!


## Features

- Support for any database that the [`sql`](https://github.com/brianc/node-sql) module supports
- Support for CRUD operations (`Model.create`, `Model.update`, `Model.destroy`)
- Support querying (`Model.findOne`, `Model.findMany`)
- Support counting records (`Model.count`)
- Support instance methods (`model.update`, `model.destroy`)
- Support before/after style hooks (`Model.beforeCreate`, `Model.afterCreate`, `Model.beforeUpdate`, `Model.afterUpdate`, `Model.beforeDestroy`, `Model.afterDestroy`)
- Expand associated references so you don't have to manually.


## TODO

- [ ] Support `or`/`and` style queries
- [ ] Add validation support


## Installation

```bash
# npm
npm i -S simple-sql-model

# or yarn
yarn add simple-sql-model
```


## Usage

```js
const Connect = require('pg-promise')()
const Model = require('simple-sql-model')

// Connect to a Postgres DB. The connection can
// be to any SQL compatible DB that the `sql`
// module supports. The returned connection
// object must provide a Promise returning `query` 
// method to be compatible.
const connection = Connect({
  database: 'my-db',
  user: 'myuser',
})

class Account extends Model {}

Account.configure({
  connection,
  table: 'accounts',
  columns: [ 'id' ],
})

class User extends Model {

  //---------------------------------------
  // Instance methods
  //---------------------------------------

  toString() {
    return this.name
  }


  //---------------------------------------
  // Class methods
  //---------------------------------------

  static myCustomClassMethod() {
    // do some magic here...
  }

  // before/after hooks:
  static beforeCreate(fields) {}
  static afterCreate(model, fields) {}
  static beforeUpdate(model, fields) {}
  static afterUpdate(model, fields) {}
  static beforeDestroy(model) {}
  static afterDestroy() {}

}

// Setup the database connection for the model.
User.configure({

  // The DB connection to use. Must provide a Promise
  // returning `query` function to be compatible.
  connection,

  table: 'users',

  // Define columns in the table
  columns: [
    'id',
    'accountId', // foreign key
    'name',
    'isAdmin', // gets snake-cased to `is_admin`
  ],

  // Define any foreign key references. We auto-expand
  // these refernces into their respective model
  // instances.
  references: {
    account: { // expands associated model into `model.account`
      model: Account,
      key: 'accountId',
    },
  },
})



//-------------------------------------------------------
// Create rows
//-------------------------------------------------------

// Save row directly.
const user = await User.create({ name: 'John' })

// Initialize model instance and then save it to the DB.
const user2 = new User({ name: 'Bill' })
await user2.save()


//-------------------------------------------------------
// Update rows
//-------------------------------------------------------

await user.update({ name: 'Johnny' })

await User.update(user.id, { name: 'Johnny' })


//-------------------------------------------------------
// Find rows
//-------------------------------------------------------

await User.findOne(user.id)

// Returns first match from query
await User.findOne({
  where: { name: { equals: 'John' } },
})

// Returns all users
await User.findMany()

// Returns array of the first 5 matches ordered by first name
await User.findMany({
  where: { name: { equals: 'John' } },
  order: { name: 'asc' },
  limit: 5,
})


//-------------------------------------------------------
// References
//-------------------------------------------------------

const account = await Account.create()
const user = await User.create({
  accountId: account.id,
  name: 'Joe Blow',
})
user.account // same as `account` model instances


//-------------------------------------------------------
// Count number of rows
//-------------------------------------------------------

await User.count()

await User.count({
  // includes j in name (case-insensitive)
  where: { name: { ilike: '%j%' } },
})


//-------------------------------------------------------
// Delete rows
//-------------------------------------------------------

await user.destroy()

await User.destroy(user.id)

await User.destroy({ where: { name: { equals: 'John' } } })

// Destroys everything so we want to make sure you 
// want this to happen!
await User.destroyAll({ yesImReallySure: true })


//-------------------------------------------------------
// Other helpful methods
//-------------------------------------------------------

User.toString() //=> 'User'
String(User) //=> 'User'
User.tableName // => 'users'
User.columns // => [ 'id', 'name', 'isAdmin' ]
```


## API

A lot of the built in class methods allow you to pass in an ID or a query object to find matching rows. 

The ID can be a `Number` or a `String` (eg `1` or `'1'`).

The query object looks like this:

```js
{
  where: {
    name: { equals: 'John' },
  },
  order: {
    name: 'desc',
  },
  limit: 5,
}
```

Checkout [this page](https://github.com/brianc/node-sql/blob/5ec7827cf637a4fe6b930fd4e8d27e6a8cb5289f/test/binary-clause-tests.js#L11) on the available `where` options. Also check out the test in this project for more examples.


### Class Methods


#### `Model.configure({ connection, columns, references, table })`

This must be called to connect your model to a SQL database.

- **Returns:**  `undefined`
- **Arguments:**
  - `connection` - A connection to a SQL database that provides a Promise aware `.query()` method. This `query` method is what `simple-sql-model` will pass SQL strings to. It expects the results to be return directly (eg a `Object` representing a row or an `Array` representing a set of rows).
  - `columns` - An `Array` of table column name `String`s that map to your schema. They can be in snake_case or camelCase as we always convert to snake_case when converting queries to SQL.
  - `references` (optional) - An object representing a mapping between a foreign key and it's model. By creating references, we will automatically expand any associated models.
  - `table` - The name of the table in your database to connect to (eg `'users'` or `'products'`).

#### `Model.create(fields)`

Creates a new row in the DB with the given fields and returns a new model instance.

- **Returns:**  Promise for a new `Model` instance.
- **Arguments:**
  - `fields` - The fields to create the new model from. Must match the schema.


#### `Model.beforeCreate(fields)`

If defined in child class, gets called before a `Model` is created.

- **Returns:**  Promise for fields that were passed to `Model.create()`
- **Arguments:**
  - `fields` - The fields passed to `Model.create()`


#### `Model.afterCreate(model, fields)`

If defined in child class, gets called after a `Model` is created.

- **Returns:**  Promise for fields and model that were created by `Model.create()`
- **Arguments:**
  - `model` - The `Model` instance of the created row.
  - `fields` - The fields passed to `Model.create()`


#### `Model.findOne(idOrQuery)`

Finds one (or no) rows based on the given ID or query.

- **Returns:** Promise for a `Model` instance of the matched row or `null`.
- **Arguments:**
  - `idOrQuery` - An ID (`Number` or `String`) or query object to find the row in the table.


#### `Model.findMany(query)`

Finds one or more rows based on the given ID or query.

- **Returns:** Promise for an `Array` of `Model` instances of the matched row or an empty array (`[]`).
- **Arguments:**  
  - `idOrQuery` - An ID (`Number` or `String`) or query object to find the row in the table.


#### `Model.update(idOrQuery, changes)`

Updates a row in the table with given changes based on an ID or query.

- **Returns:** Promise for an updated `Model` instance.
- **Arguments:**  
  - `idOrQuery` - An ID (`Number` or `String`) or query object to find the row in the table.
  - `changes` - An `Object` of the changes to the row. This can be one, some or all of the columns in the given table to change (eg partial or full updates are possible).


#### `Model.beforeUpdate(model, fields)`

If defined in child class, gets called before a `Model` is updated.

- **Returns:**  Promise for `Model` instance before modification and the fields that were passed to `Model.update()`
- **Arguments:**
  - `model` - The `Model` instance before updating.
  - `fields` - The fields passed to `Model.update()`


#### `Model.afterUpdate(model, fields)`

If defined in child class, gets called after a `Model` is updated.

- **Returns:**  Promise for fields and model that were updated by `Model.update()`
- **Arguments:**
  - `model` - The `Model` instance of the updated row.
  - `fields` - The fields passed to `Model.update()`


#### `Model.destroy(idOrQuery)`

Deletes a row from the table based on an ID or query.

- **Returns:** Promise returning `undefined`
- **Arguments:**  
  - `idOrQuery` - An ID (`Number` or `String`) or query object to find the row to delete in the table.


#### `Model.beforeDestroy(model)`

If defined in child class, gets called before a `Model` is destroyed.

- **Returns:**  Promise for `Model` instance before destroying
- **Arguments:**
  - `model` - The `Model` instance of the updated row.


#### `Model.afterDestroy()`

If defined in child class, gets called after a `Model` is destroyed.

- **Returns:**  Promise for `undefined`


#### `Model.count([query])`

Count up the number of matching records in the table. If an optional query is passed in, count the number of rows that match the query.

- **Returns:** Promise returning a count (`Number`) of matching rows or `0`.
- **Arguments:**  
  - `query` (optional) - The query to use to limited the returned rows. If no query provided, it returns total amount of rows for this table.


### Class Properties


#### `Model.className`

- **Returns:** the name of the constructor class as a `String`


#### `Model.connection`

- **Returns:** the provided database connection object.


#### `Model.tableName`

- **Returns:** the provided table name.


#### `Model.columns`
- **Returns:** the provided `Array` of column names.


### Instance Methods


#### `model.save()`

Create or update the given model instance. If the model is persisted to the DB, we update it, otherwise we create a new row.

- **Returns:** Promise for the updated model instance


#### `model.destroy()`

- Same as `Model.destroy()` but no ID is required.


## Development

```bash
# Setup the right node version using nvm
nvm install
nvm use

# Install deps
npm install

# Create a Postgres database named "simple-sql-model-test"

# Setup database table
# Update the DB username if necessary by passing DB_USERNAME=yourname
./setup.sh

npm test # or npm run watch-test
```


## Changelog

### v0.8.0

- Add `references` to `Model.configure` which will automatically expand any associated models automatically.
- Go back to using `async`/`await`

### v0.7.0

- Remove `model.update()` in favor of a better `model.save` that creates or updates depending on if the instance is persisted in the DB.

### v0.6.1

- Add better error message when a filter is called on a field not in the schema.

### v0.6.0

- Add `model.className` getter to return constructor class name.

### v0.5.0

- Add hooks for lifecycle methods `Model.beforeCreate`, `Model.afterCreate`, `Model.beforeUpdate`, `Model.afterUpdate`, `Model.beforeDestroy`, and `Model.afterDestroy`.

### v0.4.2

- **[BREAKING]:** Change `Model.schema` to `Model.columns`.

### v0.4.1

- Fix changelog numbers in readme

### v0.4.0

- Add `model.save()` method to create a row from an unsaved model instance.
- Update readme.

### v0.3.1

- Change Node dependency version
- Update readme

### v0.3.0

- Allow `model.update()` and `model.destroy()` instance methods
- Remove dependency on `async`/`await` support
- DRY things up a bit

### v0.2.0

- Fix camelCasing of queries to be consistent

### v0.1.0

Initial release. Implement `create`, `update`, `destroy`, `findOne`, `findMany`, and `count`.


## Credits

Licensed under an MIT license by [Dana Woodman](http://danawoodman.com).

Pull requests welcome!

Commit message:

Fix count bug with hardcoded table name, add prettier formatting.

readme.md, after:

# Simple SQL Model

[![styled with prettier](https://img.shields.io/badge/styled_with-prettier-ff69b4.svg)](https://github.com/prettier/prettier)

> A simple model wrapper around the `sql` library with helpful query functions.

This provides a bunch of convenience methods to create simple DB models quickly in a Rails-style query layout.


## Caveats

- This is considered somewhat in flux, don't use in production unless you're sure.
- This is stupid simple, it's just a dumb wrapper around the awesome `sql` module; you should check the source in `model.js` and the tests in `model.test.js` to see what's going on. I swear, it's *really simple*.
- This depends on new ES6 features like `async`/`await`, `Class` so use Node 7.8+ or above or transpile using Babel or similar.
- This isn't feature complete but it offers hooks to extend so you're not stuck with it's functionality. Pull requests welcome though!


## Features

- Support for any database that the [`sql`](https://github.com/brianc/node-sql) module supports
- Support for CRUD operations (`Model.create`, `Model.update`, `Model.destroy`)
- Support querying (`Model.findOne`, `Model.findMany`)
- Support counting records (`Model.count`)
- Support instance methods (`model.update`, `model.destroy`)
- Support before/after style hooks (`Model.beforeCreate`, `Model.afterCreate`, `Model.beforeUpdate`, `Model.afterUpdate`, `Model.beforeDestroy`, `Model.afterDestroy`)
- Expand associated references so you don't have to manually.


## TODO

- [ ] Support `or`/`and` style queries
- [ ] Add validation support


## Installation

```bash
# npm
npm i -S simple-sql-model

# or yarn
yarn add simple-sql-model
```


## Usage

```js
const Connect = require('pg-promise')()
const Model = require('simple-sql-model')

// Connect to a Postgres DB. The connection can
// be to any SQL compatible DB that the `sql`
// module supports. The returned connection
// object must provide a Promise returning `query` 
// method to be compatible.
const connection = Connect({
  database: 'my-db',
  user: 'myuser',
})

class Account extends Model {}

Account.configure({
  connection,
  table: 'accounts',
  columns: [ 'id' ],
})

class User extends Model {

  //---------------------------------------
  // Instance methods
  //---------------------------------------

  toString() {
    return this.name
  }


  //---------------------------------------
  // Class methods
  //---------------------------------------

  static myCustomClassMethod() {
    // do some magic here...
  }

  // before/after hooks:
  static beforeCreate(fields) {}
  static afterCreate(model, fields) {}
  static beforeUpdate(model, fields) {}
  static afterUpdate(model, fields) {}
  static beforeDestroy(model) {}
  static afterDestroy() {}

}

// Setup the database connection for the model.
User.configure({

  // The DB connection to use. Must provide a Promise
  // returning `query` function to be compatible.
  connection,

  table: 'users',

  // Define columns in the table
  columns: [
    'id',
    'accountId', // foreign key
    'name',
    'isAdmin', // gets snake-cased to `is_admin`
  ],

  // Define any foreign key references. We auto-expand
  // these refernces into their respective model
  // instances.
  references: {
    account: { // expands associated model into `model.account`
      model: Account,
      key: 'accountId',
    },
  },
})



//-------------------------------------------------------
// Create rows
//-------------------------------------------------------

// Save row directly.
const user = await User.create({ name: 'John' })

// Initialize model instance and then save it to the DB.
const user2 = new User({ name: 'Bill' })
await user2.save()


//-------------------------------------------------------
// Update rows
//-------------------------------------------------------

await user.update({ name: 'Johnny' })

await User.update(user.id, { name: 'Johnny' })


//-------------------------------------------------------
// Find rows
//-------------------------------------------------------

await User.findOne(user.id)

// Returns first match from query
await User.findOne({
  where: { name: { equals: 'John' } },
})

// Returns all users
await User.findMany()

// Returns array of the first 5 matches ordered by first name
await User.findMany({
  where: { name: { equals: 'John' } },
  order: { name: 'asc' },
  limit: 5,
})


//-------------------------------------------------------
// References
//-------------------------------------------------------

const account = await Account.create()
const user = await User.create({
  accountId: account.id,
  name: 'Joe Blow',
})
user.account // same as `account` model instances


//-------------------------------------------------------
// Count number of rows
//-------------------------------------------------------

await User.count()

await User.count({
  // includes j in name (case-insensitive)
  where: { name: { ilike: '%j%' } },
})


//-------------------------------------------------------
// Delete rows
//-------------------------------------------------------

await user.destroy()

await User.destroy(user.id)

await User.destroy({ where: { name: { equals: 'John' } } })

// Destroys everything so we want to make sure you 
// want this to happen!
await User.destroyAll({ yesImReallySure: true })


//-------------------------------------------------------
// Other helpful methods
//-------------------------------------------------------

User.toString() //=> 'User'
String(User) //=> 'User'
User.tableName // => 'users'
User.columns // => [ 'id', 'name', 'isAdmin' ]
```


## API

A lot of the built in class methods allow you to pass in an ID or a query object to find matching rows. 

The ID can be a `Number` or a `String` (eg `1` or `'1'`).

The query object looks like this:

```js
{
  where: {
    name: { equals: 'John' },
  },
  order: {
    name: 'desc',
  },
  limit: 5,
}
```

Checkout [this page](https://github.com/brianc/node-sql/blob/5ec7827cf637a4fe6b930fd4e8d27e6a8cb5289f/test/binary-clause-tests.js#L11) on the available `where` options. Also check out the test in this project for more examples.


### Class Methods


#### `Model.configure({ connection, columns, references, table })`

This must be called to connect your model to a SQL database.

- **Returns:**  `undefined`
- **Arguments:**
  - `connection` - A connection to a SQL database that provides a Promise aware `.query()` method. This `query` method is what `simple-sql-model` will pass SQL strings to. It expects the results to be return directly (eg a `Object` representing a row or an `Array` representing a set of rows).
  - `columns` - An `Array` of table column name `String`s that map to your schema. They can be in snake_case or camelCase as we always convert to snake_case when converting queries to SQL.
  - `references` (optional) - An object representing a mapping between a foreign key and it's model. By creating references, we will automatically expand any associated models.
  - `table` - The name of the table in your database to connect to (eg `'users'` or `'products'`).

#### `Model.create(fields)`

Creates a new row in the DB with the given fields and returns a new model instance.

- **Returns:**  Promise for a new `Model` instance.
- **Arguments:**
  - `fields` - The fields to create the new model from. Must match the schema.


#### `Model.beforeCreate(fields)`

If defined in child class, gets called before a `Model` is created.

- **Returns:**  Promise for fields that were passed to `Model.create()`
- **Arguments:**
  - `fields` - The fields passed to `Model.create()`


#### `Model.afterCreate(model, fields)`

If defined in child class, gets called after a `Model` is created.

- **Returns:**  Promise for fields and model that were created by `Model.create()`
- **Arguments:**
  - `model` - The `Model` instance of the created row.
  - `fields` - The fields passed to `Model.create()`


#### `Model.findOne(idOrQuery)`

Finds one (or no) rows based on the given ID or query.

- **Returns:** Promise for a `Model` instance of the matched row or `null`.
- **Arguments:**
  - `idOrQuery` - An ID (`Number` or `String`) or query object to find the row in the table.


#### `Model.findMany(query)`

Finds one or more rows based on the given ID or query.

- **Returns:** Promise for an `Array` of `Model` instances of the matched row or an empty array (`[]`).
- **Arguments:**  
  - `idOrQuery` - An ID (`Number` or `String`) or query object to find the row in the table.


#### `Model.update(idOrQuery, changes)`

Updates a row in the table with given changes based on an ID or query.

- **Returns:** Promise for an updated `Model` instance.
- **Arguments:**  
  - `idOrQuery` - An ID (`Number` or `String`) or query object to find the row in the table.
  - `changes` - An `Object` of the changes to the row. This can be one, some or all of the columns in the given table to change (eg partial or full updates are possible).


#### `Model.beforeUpdate(model, fields)`

If defined in child class, gets called before a `Model` is updated.

- **Returns:**  Promise for `Model` instance before modification and the fields that were passed to `Model.update()`
- **Arguments:**
  - `model` - The `Model` instance before updating.
  - `fields` - The fields passed to `Model.update()`


#### `Model.afterUpdate(model, fields)`

If defined in child class, gets called after a `Model` is updated.

- **Returns:**  Promise for fields and model that were updated by `Model.update()`
- **Arguments:**
  - `model` - The `Model` instance of the updated row.
  - `fields` - The fields passed to `Model.update()`


#### `Model.destroy(idOrQuery)`

Deletes a row from the table based on an ID or query.

- **Returns:** Promise returning `undefined`
- **Arguments:**  
  - `idOrQuery` - An ID (`Number` or `String`) or query object to find the row to delete in the table.


#### `Model.beforeDestroy(model)`

If defined in child class, gets called before a `Model` is destroyed.

- **Returns:**  Promise for `Model` instance before destroying
- **Arguments:**
  - `model` - The `Model` instance of the updated row.


#### `Model.afterDestroy()`

If defined in child class, gets called after a `Model` is destroyed.

- **Returns:**  Promise for `undefined`


#### `Model.count([query])`

Count up the number of matching records in the table. If an optional query is passed in, count the number of rows that match the query.

- **Returns:** Promise returning a count (`Number`) of matching rows or `0`.
- **Arguments:**  
  - `query` (optional) - The query to use to limited the returned rows. If no query provided, it returns total amount of rows for this table.


### Class Properties


#### `Model.className`

- **Returns:** the name of the constructor class as a `String`


#### `Model.connection`

- **Returns:** the provided database connection object.


#### `Model.tableName`

- **Returns:** the provided table name.


#### `Model.columns`
- **Returns:** the provided `Array` of column names.


### Instance Methods


#### `model.save()`

Create or update the given model instance. If the model is persisted to the DB, we update it, otherwise we create a new row.

- **Returns:** Promise for the updated model instance


#### `model.destroy()`

- Same as `Model.destroy()` but no ID is required.


## Development

```bash
# Setup the right node version using nvm
nvm install
nvm use

# Install deps
npm install

# Create a Postgres database named "simple-sql-model-test"

# Setup database table
# Update the DB username if necessary by passing DB_USERNAME=yourname
./setup.sh

npm test # or npm run watch-test
```

Please see the `prettier.opts` file for prettier confiuration. You should run `npm run format` when making changes. We have a pre-commit hook setup to do this for you before you commit in case you forget 👍


## Changelog

### v0.8.1

- Fix issue where count was hard coding the table name. Doh... 😵
- Add prettier formatting configuration via `npm run format` as well as a pre-commit hook

### v0.8.0

- Add `references` to `Model.configure` which will automatically expand any associated models automatically.
- Go back to using `async`/`await`

### v0.7.0

- Remove `model.update()` in favor of a better `model.save` that creates or updates depending on if the instance is persisted in the DB.

### v0.6.1

- Add better error message when a filter is called on a field not in the schema.

### v0.6.0

- Add `model.className` getter to return constructor class name.

### v0.5.0

- Add hooks for lifecycle methods `Model.beforeCreate`, `Model.afterCreate`, `Model.beforeUpdate`, `Model.afterUpdate`, `Model.beforeDestroy`, and `Model.afterDestroy`.

### v0.4.2

- **[BREAKING]:** Change `Model.schema` to `Model.columns`.

### v0.4.1

- Fix changelog numbers in readme

### v0.4.0

- Add `model.save()` method to create a row from an unsaved model instance.
- Update readme.

### v0.3.1

- Change Node dependency version
- Update readme

### v0.3.0

- Allow `model.update()` and `model.destroy()` instance methods
- Remove dependency on `async`/`await` support
- DRY things up a bit

### v0.2.0

- Fix camelCasing of queries to be consistent

### v0.1.0

Initial release. Implement `create`, `update`, `destroy`, `findOne`, `findMany`, and `count`.


## Credits

Licensed under an MIT license by [Dana Woodman](http://danawoodman.com).

Pull requests welcome!
